Welcome to "Mind
Shift." "Mind Shift"
is a unique talk show where
we take the time to explore
important issues, ideas, and
viewpoints that you don't
often see in the mainstream.
Today, we're going to look at
the prophecies of the Toltecs
from Mexico.
Descendants of the Aztecs,
the Toltecs, like the Maya,
understood this time as a
threshold of tremendous change
and transformation.
Back in 2006 I
published a book--
"2012: The Return
of Quetzalcoatl,"
where I explored the prophecies
of traditional and indigenous
cultures, including
the Hopi in Arizona
and the classical Mayan
civilization of the Yucatan.
So in my work, I never proposed
we were approaching a doomsday
threshold or that we
would suddenly experience
a dimensional shift or a mass
activation of the pineal gland,
or that we would suddenly enter
a singularity where matter
and information became one.
I always thought it was going
to be more subtle than that,
and that 2012 was
an invitation--
or let's say an
opportunity-- for humanity
to become more
conscious and aware
or our impact on the planet,
and to change the direction
of our civilization.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[APPLAUSE]
Hey there, folks.
I'm Daniel Pinchbeck.
Welcome to the this
episode of "Mind Shift."
Today we'll be talking
with Sergio Magana.
He is Toltec lineage
holder who wrote a really
fascinating book
called "2012-2021:
The Dawn of the Sixth Sun."
And obviously I have a
personal interest in this book.
Years ago I wrote a
book called "2012--
The Return of Quetzalcoatl,"
looking at the prophecies
of cultures like the classical
Maya that we've reached
the end of a 5,125-year cycle.
And Sergio's work kind of
brings that into the future,
looking at Nahuatl
prophecies, Toltec prophecies,
about this time.
So thanks for being here.
And I'm excited for
this conversation.
ANNOUNCER: Sergio
Magana was initiated
into the 5,000-year-old
Toltec lineage
Mesoamerica and has
become a respected
healer in Mexico City.
Sergio is also a student
of the Tol shamanic lineage
of Dreaming Knowledge.
Sergio believes that the time
to share this ancient wisdom
has come, and is one of the few
voices in the world sharing it.
He is the founder of
Centro Energetico Integral,
and hosts a daily radio
show in Mexico City called
"2012-- the Days to Come."
He also authored a
book called "2012-2021:
The Dawn of the Sixth Sun,
the Path of Quetzalcoatl."
Nobel Prize nominee Ervin
Laszlo said of the book,
his writing deserves to become
a pillar of the new paradigm
wisdom we need as we enter
the critical years that
mark the dawn of the sixth sun.
[APPLAUSE]
Sergio, I'm so
happy that you could
join us, that it worked out.
Thank you, Daniel.
So Yeah.
Let's start out by a little bit
of your history and biography.
Who is Sergio Magana?
My biography.
Interesting-- no, not
interesting, my biography.
But I am Mexican, actually.
I am originally Catholic.
But my mother had to work.
So I was raised
really by my nanny.
She was the daughter of the main
healer of the Otomi community.
So since I was a child--
-Which community?
SERGIO MAGANA: Otomi.
Otomis are a community that
live close to Mexico City.
So I was raised in
the indigenous wisdom.
Because my nanny, for
example, instead of giving you
an aspirin for a
headache and something,
she smoked and blew out the
pain and all those things.
So I was really
raised in her way.
I began learning Otomi
and all those things.
So when I was very
young, I started
to look for teachers of the
ancient tradition of Mexico.
And I lived a long path.
For example, I had to
go with the dancers
that are with feathers and
drums and all those things.
I mean, was that strange?
So you were brought up in
a Spanish, Mexican context.
But then you found
yourself fascinated
by the indigenous culture.
Was that unusual?
SERGIO MAGANA: Yeah,
very, for my family.
When I started in these things,
they thought that I was really
not-- but then I kept on.
And I began looking for
the groups of dancers
where there are a lot of
keepers of the tradition.
And in the beginning,
I was kind of rejected.
But then I was accepted
in the community.
And I found my first teacher
about dreaming, nahualism,
that is almost lost in Mexico.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: So wait.
Nagualism?
SERGIO MAGANA: Nahualism.
N-A-G-U-A-L?
-N-A-H-U-A-L-I-S-M. Nahualism.
-Nahualism.
So tell us what that is.
Nahualism was the
ancient training
for rulers and for warriors.
It's the training of
the sleeping state.
Because for us, there
are two divisions.
Tonal is who you are awake.
And nahual is who you
are sleeping or dead.
It could be like
a kind of spirit.
But nahualism is to be able to
be the master of the dreams.
For us, in the tradition, the
dreams create the reality.
So this will be like
the dream of the dream.
So we learn, in all
these trainings,
altered states like ensonacion--
that is dreaming while awake.
Or the obsidian mirror-- to be
changing because the mirror is
like a dream.
So these are like half
states of perception.
But the main thing is to
be lucid in your dreams,
to be controlling
your dreams, to be
shape-shifting in your
dreams, and to be able to move
reality through that training.
So that was my first
teacher-- Hugo Nahui.
And then--
-What was his name?
Hugo.
Hugo, and nahui is
four in Nahuatl.
So like I am Ocelocoyotl.
I am Sergio, Christian.
But Ocelocoyotl in Nahuatl.
DANIEL PINCHBECK:
What does that mean?
SERGIO MAGANA: Ocelocoyotl?
Coyote Jaguar.
OK.
So he chose Hugo Four.
So that's his name.
And then I found--
DANIEL PINCHBECK: How
old were you when you
started doing that training?
Like 19.
Like 20 years ago.
And then I found Xolotl.
Hugo introduced me to Xolotl.
That is the one that has all
the counts and all the things
that I wrote in that book.
That was the one that showed
me how to talk Nahuatl,
how to make the etymologies,
and through the language
find the true meaning that the
ancient ones wanted to tell.
And you said that when
you expressed interest
in discovering this
knowledge, they
said that mostly, nobody had
discovered it because they
just weren't interested.
Is that right?
Yeah.
Because a lot of people say
that there are secret people
that are holding
all those things.
Probably doing the Spanish
occupation-- because it
was forbidden to
be practicing this.
But sometimes I asked Xolotl
why this wasn't shared before.
And he said, because
no one was interested.
It's not that we
were hiding anything.
No one was interested in the
ancient indigenous wisdom.
And how would they
trace their lineage back?
Back to different--
always in Mexico City,
or different tribal areas?
SERGIO MAGANA: No.
The Nahuatl is really-- there
is a language before Nahuatl
that was called Uto-Azteca.
That was originated in Utah,
actually, here in the States.
From there it moved through the
North in Veracruz in Mexico.
And then it extended
to Mexico City,
to Pueblana, and
to many regions.
So it was the language
of the Olmecs.
How do we know?
Because Olmec means their
lineage of movement.
Then the Teotihuacan then the
[INAUDIBLE], then the Toltecs
that are kind of
famous in the world.
But we have other-- for
example, Toltec comes from Toli.
Toli is the measure.
So it really means the
ones that had the measure,
and the measure of the cosmos.
That's why then
the Toltecs trained
the last part of the Mayans.
And from that, the
Mayans and the Aztecs
created the calendars
that now are very famous.
I see.
OK.
And so let's talk about
2012 a little bit.
It sounds like there's
definitely overlap between what
is understood about the
classical Maya interest
in those dates and the
Toltec, Nahuatl understanding.
SERGIO MAGANA: It's similar,
but a little bit different.
The 2012 had to be
with the outer ring
of the Aztec calendar.
You have one there.
So the outer ring
is the long count.
The long count is 26,500 years.
That is like similar to the
procession of equinoxes.
But the Mayans
split that in five.
So they got the
kins, or the cycles
of 5,000-something years.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: What's a kin,
again, just for the audience?
It's the big cycle
of the Mayans,
that is, I think, 5,000-- I'm
not a specialist in the Mayan.
But 5,000 something.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: Yeah.
5,125 years.
But for us, the main number
of the universe is the four.
Because the four is
repeated everywhere.
Like four elements,
four phases of the moon,
two solstices, two
equinoxes, the four
main moments of
the day-- sunset,
sun rising, midday, midnight.
So we split the
long count in four.
So we got bigger
cycles than the Mayans.
And for us, we named
those periods suns.
And the measure of a
sun is 6,625 years.
And for us now, it was
because only every five suns
we have the same date as
the Mayans of the shift.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: I see.
And in this time, we
have the same date.
Because then they change--
they will change 1,000 years
before us in the next sun.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: I see.
And so explain,
from your book-- you
talk about how we're entering
this time of the Sixth Sun.
We're actually in a transitional
period between 2012 or 201s--
or sometimes you
even say it's earlier
than that-- through 2021.
Yeah.
The Mayans have an exact count.
For example, they say
it's finishing one day,
and the other day is the next
kin, We don't do like that.
We are more like nature,
that it could be night
and then slowly it's
entering the day.
And then it becomes day.
So for us, all the Toltec mystic
accounts are based in eclipses.
So for us, the transition
between Fifth and Sixth Sun
started in a full
sun eclipse that
happened in Mexico in 1991.
That's when the Sixth
Sun began entering
in the Fifth Sun kingdom.
Then for us, they
got the same power
the 21st of December of 2012.
And then now,
slowly, the Fifth Sun
is going out to allow
the Sixth Sun from 2021
to be ruling light for
thousands of years.
And why are eclipses
particularly significant?
Because we like-- for us, the
main division that people have
is tonal/nahual.
Like I said, who you are awake
and who you are sleeping.
And if you see, in
an eclipse, the moon
is for us the representative
of the nahual,
of the dreaming state, and the
sun of their sleeping state.
So when they are aligned is
when your tonal and nahual join.
And then you have an
opportunity to make a change.
That's why all the Toltec mystic
accounts are based in eclipses.
And why was this one in 1991
particularly significant?
Because it was in Mexico.
And it was a very long,
complete sun eclipse.
And in the counts, it was
the beginning of the entering
of the Sixth Sun.
And it will end in
another eclipse of 2021.
That for us, the
keepers-- for example,
in the Virgin of Guadelupe--
that is the Virgin of Mexico,
that for us in the
tradition is not
a Virgin-- it was a codex that
[INAUDIBLE], an eagle warrior
had.
The position of the stars
that she has in the veil
is the position of the eclipse
of 2021, when the Sixth
Sun will enter completely.
I had heard that the
Virgin of Guadalupe
was related to the Aztec
deity of Coatlicue.
It was--
DANIEL PINCHBECK:
Kind of like it
was a way of
preserving that energy
and taking it to
a Christian form.
SERGIO MAGANA: It's preserving
completely the tradition.
For example, for us
in the tradition,
we must break the
prison of the moon--
and if you see the Virgin,
she's stepping in the moon--
to reach your own sun.
That means not the physical
moon, but your own moon,
the way that you dream.
It would be like the unconscious
for the modern culture.
And it's the Black Tezcatlipoca
for us, the mirror.
So she's stepping down the
moon and a black angel.
So the temple of
the Virgin is where
the Tonantzin, the Mother
Earth, and Coatlicue, the force
of life and death, existed.
But it's really the
preservation of all the counts
and the mountains
and the tradition.
So let's talk about
what's different,
as we go into the Sixth
Sun, from the Fifth Sun.
SERGIO MAGANA: A lot of things.
For example, for us,
one Sun is of light.
And the next Sun is of darkness.
Not meaning good or
bad like people think.
It's that one is of the day,
and one is of the night.
So the Fifth Sun
that we're finishing
is like being in the daytime.
So when you're awake,
you have the eyes opened.
And where are you seeing?
Outside.
So where do you put God?
Where do you put medicine?
Outside.
And satisfaction?
And we come from a
long, long period there.
The religions are very
good in the Suns of Light.
Because everyone looks
for the solutions outside.
But now, we are entering
into a Sun of Darkness.
The Sun of Darkness is
when you close the eyes.
And you must go to your inside.
So God goes back to you--
medicine, satisfaction,
and all those things.
That's why the formulas
that worked for hundreds
of years, of religion
and all those things,
are not working anymore.
People are not satisfied.
Now people that apparently got
everything outside-- families
and probably success
and all those things--
they are not satisfied.
They are looking inside.
Now that's why a
lot of people are
facing the crisis of depression
and all those things.
Because now everything
goes again to the inside--
to our underworlds
that are the things
that we haven't solved
for us, and also
for the dreaming state.
So in your book, you
said that as we go deeper
into the age of the
Sixth Sun, the dream
states become more significant.
SERGIO MAGANA: A lot.
Can you expound on that?
Explain that a bit more.
-Yeah.
The conquest of the inside will
be-- the part of your inside
that is more important
is the dreaming state.
For us, it's like
the half of the path
between the one that reflects,
or the creator, and us.
So the studies of dreaming
in the modern culture
started with Freud and Jung.
But it was left.
And now it's coming back.
There are a lot of
groups of dreamers,
and a lot of people that
are taking the information
back-- Yoga of the
Dreams, us in nahualism.
And it's amazing what
you can do with dreams.
For example, we teach how to
heal your body through dreams.
And there are people
that are completely sick.
And in one night, they
can solve what they
haven't solved in their life.
And they wake up-- if they
found the dream of healing,
or the dream of change and all
those things, in one night,
they can solve the things.
And this is true.
A lot of people-- not a lot.
But some people who were blind,
for example, in the night,
and they find the dream,
they can see in the morning.
-Are we in a dream right now?
-Yeah.
This is the dream
of the other dream.
DANIEL PINCHBECK:
What does that mean?
For us in Nahuatl
dream is the tonal.
So for example, yesterday
I was giving a workshop.
And they asked me, if
you want to heal someone,
do you have to have
their permission?
I said, for us, no.
Because if you have the
idea of healing someone,
it's that in the dreaming
state you agreed with that one.
He asked for help
or you offered.
And you agreed to do this.
So for example, for me
doing the interview,
I know that we dreamt
about this before.
And now we are here.
Is there another way--
like, how would people
in the Western
esoteric traditions
talk about the dreaming state?
Like would people say the astral
realms or something like that?
Astral dimensions?
Or is there another way
to language it in a way?
It could be.
For us, there are 13 heavens,
from the first energy
to become matter.
So the dreaming state is
in the seventh heaven.
And the movement is
the sixth heaven.
And the physical reality
begins in the fifth.
So that's why--
What do you mean by
heaven in that sense?
It was how it was called.
Ilhuicatl in Nahuatl
means heaven.
But we say that
there are dimensions,
if we can modernize
the language, or steps,
in how energy becomes matter.
So give me the 13 in a quick--
SERGIO MAGANA: The
13th heaven is for us
Ometeotl, the unified energy.
-Start from one.
And go up to 13.
Go from one to 13.
-OK.
One is this.
The second is the physical moon.
The third is the physical sun.
The fourth are Venus
and the Pleides.
They are, for us,
very important.
Because they rule the division
between tonal and nahual.
That's the fourth.
The fifth is all the stars.
The sixth is the
heaven of movement.
The seventh is the
white heaven, or where
the spirit of the moon,
the nahual of the moon,
exists before the physical moon.
And it is the place
of the dreams.
The eighth is the yellow heaven.
It is where the spirit of the
sun, the nahual of the sun,
exists before the sun.
It's where the destiny of
everyone here is related.
It is written in that heaven.
The ninth is the blue heaven.
That is the one that
creates repetitive cycles
in all the universe.
The 10th is the red.
That is where the order of
the universe is established.
The 11th is where
the four main forces
that we named Tezcatlipoca
live, and where
they create geometries of what
is going to be living here.
The 12th is where
the Ometecuhtli
and Omecihuatl-- that means the
Mr. Two and Mrs. Two-- live.
They are like the duality, the
first energy, split into two.
And then the 13th is the main
energy center, [INAUDIBLE]
of the Black Eagle.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: So what is the
moon, then, in your tradition?
SERGIO MAGANA: The moon,
for us, was the sun before.
Because when the Fifth Sun
was created in Teotihuacan,
the legend says, there
were two essences that
were supposed to be the sun.
And one--
Essences being like spirits
or gods or beings of some sort?
SERGIO MAGANA: Yeah,
something like that, yeah.
Beings.
The one that was
supposed to be the sun
was afraid to jump into
the fire to become the sun.
So the one that was--
It was like a sacrifice.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
He jumped.
And other was so ashamed
that he jumped after.
So we have two suns.
And then they say
that they threw
a rabbit to the face
of the moon so that it
could become moon and sun.
But for us, the moon is
the Black Tezcatlipoca.
So it really was the main
essence of ancient Mexico.
But it was almost erased.
Because for a
Christian mentality,
when they ask, who is
the Black Tezcatlipoca
they say, the one that
gives you everything.
And they say, OK, like god.
The one that takes
from you everything.
Oh, like the devil.
The one that makes you reach
and the one that makes you pull.
So it was so dualistic.
In a Christian mind, either
you are good or you are bad.
So they erased him.
And they only left
Quetzalcoatl--
the lightened one, the kind one.
But really, the
Black Tezcatlipoca
is like the unconscious.
So for us, it's
the main essence.
It's the one that gives you
everything or takes from you
everything.
And every work starts
in your darkness,
in your Black Tezcatlipoca.
And he rules the mirror.
And he rules the dreaming state.
And one of his feminine names--
What is the mirror
in that sense?
SERGIO MAGANA: The
obsidian mirror.
For us-- for example,
the chacmools
that are in the pyramids
that are kind of like
turned like this in
the abs and like this--
it's our most advanced
discipline for dreaming.
But you must control of the--
because you breathe 13 times
each way.
And then you disappear
your face in the mirror.
And then you turn into a
serpent or a hummingbird
or whatever you want
to go to the mirror.
And then you lie down.
And from the mirror, your nahual
goes out to the dreaming state.
So the mirror, then,
is an entry or a portal
into these other dimensions?
A portal.
A portal to the dreaming
state and other dimensions.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: And
what you've just described
is one of the techniques
that you understand
and that you teach now?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
How long before I can turn
into a serpent and go up--
In the mirror?
Three days.
-Really?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
A lot of people
hear this and say,
it sounds so sophisticated
that it should take a life.
No.
In a real-- in a real,
real, real good training
about mirror--
like in three days.
Wow.
So-- yeah.
Go ahead.
SERGIO MAGANA: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It starts like this.
You must be able to
disappear your face.
Then you must see your eyes.
The eyes must turn to red.
That's why they say
always in the Chronicles,
the nahual was seeing
me with red eyes.
And then your face transforms
into what you want.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: So that's
a practice where it's
late at night,
you're going to bed,
and you're actually
sitting up and you're
doing this meditation
or visualization
or you're using
breathing techniques.
Yeah.
That's before.
The one complete
is before sleeping.
But to be able to do
that, you must have
been trained in the mirror.
It can be in the
mirror, or it can be--
the Mayans did it in water.
We do it in the mirror.
But in water it's
much more difficult.
Because first you have to make
stable the energy-- the image.
Then disappear it.
And then appear another.
And the water is moving.
It's very difficult.
Well, at least for me.
I prefer the mirror.
So is your dissemination
of these types of practices
part of this prophetic
transition that's happening?
Yeah.
Cuauhtemoc, the last
ruler of the Aztecs,
gave a very beautiful
speech the day
before the empire
fell down, saying
our sun has hidden in the
darkness and all those things.
But keep our treasure.
Because with the Sixth
Sun, it's coming back.
The Spanish thought that
the treasure was gold.
And they tortured
him until death.
But the treasure was knowledge.
And exactly how he said, the
lineages are opening now.
The people that held the
knowledge are opening now.
And people are interested.
Because like Xolotl said,
no one was hiding nothing.
But people weren't
really interested.
What I kind of understood
from your book--
and when we spoke
the other day I
felt like you corrected me
a little bit-- was that part
of this idea of
the Sixth Sun was
that the dream and
the waking state
were merging a little bit.
And in a way-- because what
a lot of people that I know
have been feeling
over the last years
is that they're discovering
more about synchronicity.
They're discovering
more about how
the psychic and the physical
are more integrated.
And as people make
that discovery,
it's like reality itself becomes
a bit more like a waking dream.
Is that part of this transition?
SERGIO MAGANA: Yeah, of course.
We're entering into
a dreaming Sun.
So the states begin
mixing much more.
And people, even if they
are not lucid dreamers,
they begin knowing
what they dreamt.
And the deja vus are much
more, the synchronicity,
and all those things.
Because we are, in a certain
point, remembering much more
dreams.
So that's why you say, OK.
This is synchronicity.
DANIEL PINCHBECK:
Unless you smoke pot.
In which case you can't
remember any of your dreams.
SERGIO MAGANA: OK, of course.
No, the problem is that
you forget them more.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: So
a question is, then,
what's going to happen in
terms of the prophecies
to the actual physical
consensus reality
that we share over the
next-- as we go towards 2021?
We discussed it.
You said there may be more
earthquakes or more physical
events.
Is that still part
of the process?
Yeah.
That whole thing that
the world was ending
came from the prophecies--
Mayan and Toltec.
They were really simple.
The prophecy just
said, the Fifth Sun
will finish with earthquakes.
There will be a
lot of suffering.
And everyone will die.
If you come from a Western mind
and you hear that, you say, OK.
They are saying that
the world is finishing.
But no.
Because for the tradition,
death means change.
But why don't they
just say change, then?
Because in that-- probably they
didn't have the word change.
And it's quite interesting.
Because for example, for us,
alive, we have six deaths.
Conception is one death.
Because you stop being
dead to begin living.
Then birth is a sort of death.
Because you stop
being in the womb
to start to living outside.
So all these things mean death.
So death is change.
Why will there be
a lot of suffering?
Because people don't
like to change.
That is a problem.
And earthquakes-- yeah.
There are being much more.
Because the solar
activity is increasing.
But also what it
means is that there
is a destruction between
each Sun and the next one.
And the order of the
Sun that is leaving
is destroyed to
enter in a new one.
And if you see politics,
economics, and all the things,
they are kind of shaking.
What is going to happen?
OK.
We're going to the inside.
First of all, for the
people that don't change,
they will face first
the underworlds.
The underworlds are
the repetitive patterns
that you do, the patterns of
your ancestors, heavy emotions.
All these things will increase.
And a lot of people will
face what a lot of people
said about cataclysm,
but a personal one.
But if you change, you
will go with the flow.
And for us, for example,
after the underworlds,
you can have to caves of power.
DANIEL PINCHBECK:
The what of power?
SERGIO MAGANA: The caves.
Caves of power.
SERGIO MAGANA: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
That sounds nice.
SERGIO MAGANA: For
us, the training
is, first you must face your
underworlds and solve them.
And then you enter
into 20 caves of power.
So one way to discuss the
underworlds that would be maybe
more quasi-modern
or scientific would
be talking about the
subconscious programming
that we've all gotten
from our family patterns
and from our culture.
SERGIO MAGANA: Yeah.
Paradigms.
-Paradigms.
So there's a process
that people have
to go through to
kind of de-program
from those subconscious
patterns and so on.
SERGIO MAGANA: Or suffer.
And what are the techniques
from this tradition to escape
those subconscious patterns?
For example, the most effective
that I know is the mirror.
And it's a complete
mathematical process of 36 days.
But I have taught
thousands of people.
And I have heard a lot of times
that a lot of people tell me,
36 days in the mirror did more
for my life than all the work
that I have done always.
So what does that mean--
36 days in the mirror?
Because you go to the mirror.
And then you see
your reflection.
Because for the tradition,
everything is a reflection.
But what's actually
the practice?
You spend a certain
amount of time every day
looking in the mirror,
doing a breathing thing?
SERGIO MAGANA: Yeah.
No, no, no.
You go and you disappear
yourself in the mirror.
And for us, the mirror is the
metaphor of the first creation.
So we ask the mirror to take
out the idea of us that is named
yocoia, what we think is
our history, the inner voice
that is bombing you.
Like, you cannot--
your heavy creations.
And the main part is
to take out the enemy.
The enemy, that we
name in Nahuatl yaotl,
is the part that sabotages you,
attacks you, makes you sick.
And then you see your
own enemy in the mirror.
And then you
disappear the enemy.
And you ask the
mirror to pull it.
So it's a complete
discipline of going
through all the stages or
names of the Black Tezcatlipoca
to disappear them.
The destructive force of
the nahual-- for that,
you also learn to change your
face into animals and all
of those things, to see
whom you become sleeping,
or whom you become in death.
And you see the faces change.
And the first times,
it's like, ooh.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: I've had that
experience through shamanism,
through psychedelics
like iboga, for instance,
but not so much just without.
That's the amazing
thing of this.
Because you can have all
those experiences breathing.
What type of
breathing techniques?
SERGIO MAGANA: We have
mathematical breathing.
For example, to
enter in the mirror,
we begin breathing in nine.
Because everything
is mathematic.
Because in ancient
Mexico, there were nine
fractions of the day of night.
So to enter in the
darkness, you would breathe
nine, and breathe out nine.
And then after 36
breathings of that,
you begin entering
in the mirror.
First you go and see
your image with-- we
call it the
hummingbird perception.
But this is normal perception.
And then you soften
the focus and begin
doing the peripheral vision
and all those things.
And you begin disappearing.
But then we have a
specific technique
to make the peripheral
vision less,
and then to put the attention
in one eye or in the other.
And then the face
begins changing.
And then is when you begin
to see all these things.
I wanted to talk a little
bit about what happens--
as somebody who's been doing
these techniques for 19 years,
you said?
Or something like that?
20 years.
-Yeah.
What's your dream life
like at this point?
My dream life-- for
example, now, I prefer to be
sleeping than to be awake.
It's so rich.
Do you get to be interviewed
for talk shows in your dreams,
too?
SERGIO MAGANA: I hope.
And without traffic and without
anything, you can be there.
But for example, we
have eight dreams--
No traffic.
That should be like the
14th heaven, probably.
SERGIO MAGANA: Yeah.
That would be.
For example, it's like a game.
Because you enter
in these places.
You have the codex to see
which ones are you changing.
For example, you just
say, no, don't go down.
Because it's the underworld.
And you are controlling it.
Then you recognize
yourself there
you transform into a serpent.
Then you-- and we
have many rooms
of dreaming, like
the [INAUDIBLE],
where you repair your nahual.
And you go there and
you ask for repairing.
Then you enter into the place
where all the dreams are red.
And you regenerate your body.
Then you create abundance--
whatever you want.
So it's so dynamic, and so fun.
And then in the last
levels of training,
we have, like, couples
and partners of dreaming.
And we make appointments there.
We see each other.
We cross to create things.
Then we discuss.
-Yeah.
I've actually had
experiences like that.
So I believe that to
be totally the case.
How would you differentiate
this tradition from the dream
yoga of Tibetan Buddhism?
SERGIO MAGANA: For
example, now, I
am touring, giving a
workshop about lucid dream
with a master of
Yoga of the Dreams.
But it's very different.
For example, for us more
important is vivid dreams.
And for them, it's lucid--
that is, that you feel that you
can taste and all those things.
For example-- they
use it very different.
They use things-- far example,
if they recognize themselves,
I would transform myself
into a serpent or a jaguar
or something like that.
They transform themselves
into the Buddha,
and all those things.
And then they create
dreams of compassion
and all those things.
We create dreams of power.
But I think that one-- that's
why we are doing together,
Charlie Morley and me.
Because I think that
one tradition has parts
that the other one is missing.
And the other one has parts
So together we come
do a complete map
of the dreaming state.
-Awesome.
Awesome.
Well I think Bob Dylan once
said, you can be in my dream
if I can be in yours.
SERGIO MAGANA: Yeah.
Yeah.
Totally true.
Thank you so much.
I think we've run out of time
for this little discussion.
And it's really
fascinating material.
And it's very exciting.
-Thank you.
And we're going to have a
little panel discussion next
with a few members of the New
York kind of a Mexica shamanic
underground, with Sergio,
to talk about the eagle
and the condor prophecies.
So we'll be back
right after this.
Thank you.
[LOW TONE]
[BELL]
Hey there.
I'm Daniel Pinchbeck.
Welcome back to a "Mind Shift."
And right now we're
with Sergio Magana,
the author of "2012-2021--
the Dawn of the Sixth Sun,"
and two members of the local New
York medicine world, shamanic
circle-- Salvadore and Dharma.
Do you guys want to introduce
yourselves a little bit?
Just say what you do now
and what your focus is?
SALVADORE BOLIVAR MADERA: Sure.
My name is Salvadore Bolivar.
I was raised in New York City.
So I'm a New Yorker.
By trade, I'm a filmmaker.
And also I work for an
organization called The Ghetto
Film School, which is
a nonprofit teaching
children in the New
York area about film.
And I'm program coordinator at
their first high school, which
is located in the South Bronx.
I came into these
ways back in 2008.
My family is from the Caribbean.
And I have indigenous roots,
as well as African roots
and European roots.
But I knew about that.
But I never really had the
opportunity to walk and pray
and participate in
these ways until 2008,
where I took a trip
on a film job to film
a documentary in Colombia.
And there, the
documentary was filming
indigenous ceremonies--
in particular, ayahuasca
eagle-condor ceremony.
And the shaman invited me
to partake in the medicine.
And so I agreed to.
And my life has
changed since then.
It was the first
time I had a chance
to be in an anipi, de
mescalito, also to partake
in la Madrecita, which is the
ayahuasca, and Grandfather
Peyotico, as well as San Pedro.
And a shift-- a huge
shift-- began there.
When I got back to
New York, my life just
became with a different focus.
I was searching for a
center, a connection
to this planet that
is our divine mother.
And in time, as I started
to accept these changes that
started coming into my
life, I was then introduced
to the community here.
And I began to walk with them.
And I was introduced
to elders, who then
took me on as an apprentice.
So it's kind of
interesting being
a New Yorker and
knowing New York,
and being in the film industry.
And then to incorporate
this other spiritual life
was really difficult, in
the beginning, to manage.
But with an open heart
and the confidence
that I received
from the medicine,
and what lies deep
inside me, it's
really starting
to form and become
a beautiful harmony
of assisting people,
helping people, and learning.
Really, I'm just learning to
humble myself to just learn.
Awesome.
And Dharma?
DHARMA PADRON DALY:
I am Dharma Gustina.
I come from Puerto Rico.
I've been living in New York
for eight years, almost.
My first contact with the
medicines from America,
specifically from South
America, the ayahuasca,
was 10 years ago in Ecuador.
Very beautiful,
transforming experiences--
very healing, very powerful.
And then after that,
I didn't have contact,
even when I was looking for it.
In Puerto Rico, I didn't
have the opportunity
to get in contact with those
medicines and those ways.
Until two years and a
half ago here in New York,
where I was introduced,
through a friend.
He introduced me to the
community, which is pretty big.
The community's diverse.
Many, many teachers, also.
Different medicines,
different ways, the condor
and the eagle together--
DANIEL PINCHBECK: Vision quests.
Vision quests, for example.
And it's been very
transforming, also very
healing and very beautiful.
It's so full of love and
community that I love it.
And it's something that I want
to keep exploring and learning
and growing into those ways, and
with the people around me that
have become already my family.
And I'm very much
looking forward to keep
meeting new family members.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: And Sergio,
I mean particularly-- Salvadore
and Dharma mentioned how
the plant medicines were
helpful for them initially.
What about in your tradition?
The Toltec or Nahuatl
traditions-- is it oriented
towards those plant medicines?
SERGIO MAGANA: Yeah.
A lot of people in
Mexico is looking
because of the Castaneda
books and all those things.
And I think for the
Huicholas, they look for it.
But we have a rule
in the tradition
that we must not
look for the plants.
We must not look, hire
someone, or try to buy them.
If the plant finds you,
then you can experience it.
So for example, in my
case, I have done it.
Because a plant found me.
But I've never looked.
But in the--
DANIEL PINCHBECK: How
did the plant find you?
For example, I
was in a temazcal
That is a sweating lodge.
And the guy that was
guiding the ceremony-- I
didn't know that he
was going to take out
peyote and all those things.
And then in the
sweating lodge, it
was for opening the vision
and all those things.
That we all had it.
And sometimes it has found me.
But I have never looked.
But I know, for
example, that the women
of the tradition-- they do much
more plants than us, the men.
In all the sweating lodges
and all those things that
they are doing--
not all, but a lot.
They are having
peyote or medicine.
-What's the reason for that?
-I don't know.
Because we are forbidden
to go to their meetings.
[LAUGHTER]
Yeah.
They are only women.
So I know because I have
women friends in the tradition
that they are doing that.
There's no myth behind
it, or story behind it?
No.
They use it for more intuitive
things, and all those things.
I know what happens in
their sweating lodges,
where there are all
the medicine women.
But they-- for example,
it's quite strong.
Because they have these
meetings, for example,
in October for five days.
They don't eat.
They don't drink water.
They are doing just dancing,
all the night, to the moon.
DHARMA PADRON DALY:
The Moon Dance.
And then they enter
in the sweating lodges.
And they eat peyote.
And then the grandmother says--
they have told me, because I am
not allowed-- like, you talk,
and boom, and the spirit
begins talking in women
and all those things.
So they do a lot more than us.
And let's talk about the
whole concept of the eagle
and the condor prophesy.
How do you all understand that?
Or what does it mean to you?
SALVADORE BOLIVAR
MADERA: For me, I
mean, the eagle and condor
prophecy is-- as I've been told
by several elders, it's not a
prophecy or a tradition that's
accepted by all traditions.
And in fact, it's a very
small community that looks
and follows this prophecy.
But for me, as you said,
the medicine seeks you.
I didn't even know
about the medicine.
I just got hired on a job.
And it happened to be that
the actual medicine ceremony
I was at was an eagle-condor.
So for me, it is something
that resonates with me.
I always kind of joke around
that I'm an eagle-condor baby,
sometimes.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: But
what does it mean,
exactly-- the eagle-condore?
SALVADORE BOLIVAR MADERA:
Well, eagle-condor
as I know it is-- they
say the prophecy is
that right about the time
when the eagle is almost going
to bring the condor to
extinsion-- eagle meaning North
America and condor
meaning South America--
that the condor and the
eagle will then fly together
in harmony, in order to
bring upon great healing
and the exchange of traditions,
exchange of cultures,
and exchange of medicines.
So in a way, it's the North
and the South coming together
and no longer battling.
Because if we don't know,
in this time right now
the South is dealing with a lot
of these petroleum companies
destroying-- deforestation
of the forest.
And so at this time, it's
a very, very serious time
for the people of the South
who have been trying to protect
these traditions--
but more importantly,
these medicines that are
contained in the jungle.
And so as I see
it, it is this time
where the medicine is
almost-- and these traditions
have extended their arms.
And sort of the way I see
it is like Mother Earth
kind of extending her
arms of compassion
to help us from ourselves.
Because the way we're
living in this time
is not really in a good way.
And so the eagle prophecy
talks about how, at this time,
these two traditions, these
two ways from the North
and the South, will come
together in an exchange,
in a good way, of all the things
that they have-- of healing,
of tradition, of song--
in this time that we have.
Sometimes you reach
a tricky part.
Because some elders
are very traditional.
And they're like, we
only do it this way.
And it's understandable.
Because that's
the way they know.
And also that's how they
protected this way to this time
so that we can have
this opportunity.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: Sure.
What about you, Dharma?
How do you understand it?
DHARMA PADRON DALY:
Well, what he said.
And also adding to
that, an example
of how the condor and the eagle
reunite-- what I've heard also
about the prophecy is that
before the European people
came, these medicines and
these communities from South
and North America were sharing
those medicines and those ways
already.
And when the
European people came,
they had the need,
in order to protect
those medicines and those
ways, to separate and hide
from the visible society.
And so they hid.
And now they're
coming together again.
The prophecy of the
condor-eagle is to reunite.
And one of the
things that happens
is that, for example,
the teepee-- which
is where the native
people from North America
do spiritual
practices and rituals,
is used also for
ayahuasca ceremonies.
And also one of my
teachers, for example,
is a young medicine woman.
She brings all medicines
together during the night.
And that's part
of the prophecy--
to bring all medicines
together, and to share
the wisdom of each one.
Which is very different--
what each medicine does
and the way it heals you and
the way it heals the community.
And also sharing the
rituals-- the way
it's done, the way it's shared.
And how about you, Sergio?
Does that prophecy have any
meaning in your tradition?
SERGIO MAGANA: Yeah.
For example, we
have chants that say
that the condor and the eagle
are brothers and sisters.
And that before,
they flew together.
And that because of a
misunderstanding, they
separated.
And I see it, really, like
the sharing of knowledge
and all those things.
And I work a lot with Andean
practitioners, [INAUDIBLE]
of the Andes and
all those things.
And for example,
they have brought me
there to make rituals.
And they have come.
We shared the
dreaming techniques.
They have very,
very, very different
ways of dreaming in the Andean.
For example, for them--
When you say Andean, would
you say partially Incan?
Yeah.
I think it's like the
inheritance of the Incas
that are close to Cusco.
And they do a lot of
interesting things.
So for us, it's like the
sharing of the tradition.
And we do things together.
Also, I think it's
part of that prophecy
to bring people together from
different communities, also.
It's not just to put
the medicines together.
When you go to a teepee here
in New York, for example,
you see people from
different countries,
from all over the
world, sitting together.
And that's part of
the beauty of it.
The communities have a
diversity and respect
enough for each other.
So Salvadore, you
mentioned that you're
working with young people, with
the Ghetto Youth Film Alliance.
Yeah.
I work for a
nonprofit organization
called the Ghetto Film School.
DANIEL PINCHBECK:
Ghetto Film School.
Yeah.
So I just wanted to
ask-- one thing people
have written a lot about
is in modern culture,
we lost initiation.
So young people, like
teenagers or adolescents,
don't really have a
process where they
learn about visionary states
or go on vision quests
or whatever.
And some people even think that
this is a really major problem.
Because it might even be that
those types of initiations
are necessary to fully
develop the brain.
Joseph Chilton Pearce
talks about the neocortex
actually develops
in adolescence when
people go through these kind
of initiation experiences.
So that you move from
just ego-based identity
to kind of trans-ego.
You care for the tribe
or the community.
How do you guys see
how we can-- first
of all, whether or not
you agree with that
would be the first question.
And then, how do you think
we could maybe introduce
these types of practices
to young people in a way
that would be really helpful?
I agree a lot.
Being in my experience of
working with the New York City
youth, and also
being in these ways,
I think that these practices are
sort of like rites of passage.
And it's not necessarily--
it's teachings.
A lot of our youth are lacking
general, fundamental teachings
on how to relate
with one another.
I mean, it's not just the youth.
It's even the adults.
It's the language that we use,
the effects of the vibrations--
the teachings of that,
the teachings of honoring
your elders so that there's
a place and a source
to receive the wisdom.
All these fundamental structures
that we learn in ceremony
is what's lacking in the youth,
and even in most of us adults.
For instance, the vision quest--
which comes from the Lakota,
the Plains Indians-- is a
form of a rite of passage.
And if you look back in history
of all ancient civilizations,
they had some form
of rites of passage
for the young men
and the young women.
So they can understand, what
does it mean to be an adult?
And where is your place in this
society or in this village?
And we don't have that.
So what you see in the youth
is that they're seeking for it.
But what our society shows--
what we have as symbolism,
as rites of passage, is you
can finally go and drink.
Or you can do this
and you can do that.
And then what
happens-- like for me,
I just finished my fourth
year of my vision quest.
And I'm 43 years old.
And now I'm starting
to see things
in a very, very different way.
It's like the
teachings that I have
received-- it's like
I'm starting to feel
like I'm finally grown up.
And I think that that
causes a confusion.
Because I know
growing up, for me,
was like when you get muscles,
or when you can be on your own
and get your own apartment.
That's me growing up.
And actually, it's not.
And you have a lot of adults
who are looking and searching.
And having that
longing and searching
can cause, and
open the door for,
a lot of things that
may not necessarily be
as healthy to the individual.
So I think yeah, one way we can
introduce this is to-- which
is one of the visions that came
to me in one of the ceremonies.
It's to do that, to
work with the youth.
I wasn't working with the youth.
I had worked with the
youth early on in my age.
And then I went off to do film.
And it's just been two
years that the medicine has
brought me back to the youth.
And it's for a vision
of being able to have
some sort of
program where we can
take-- at least for the city.
We need to take these
kids out of the city
and take them into nature.
And teach them the
interrelations of nature--
how important the trees are,
how important these things are,
how we are all part
of a sacred circle.
And what we say, what we
do, and even what we think
and our intentions
that we put out there,
affects everything
in that circle.
And without those
fundamental teachings,
we then are put in
a state where we're
at now, where we do-- with
our garbage, with our words,
whatever.
And it's like, oh,
it doesn't matter.
But right now, the planet's
really, really feeling it.
Because everybody's
unconscious of that.
What about you, Dharma?
What do you think?
Well, one of the
ways-- I think it's
very important for the youth
and for everybody in the world
to connect with mother nature.
Go to the simple, to
the basics, which is
nature and respect to nature.
That's one of the
foundations that we
have lost through
societies, through history.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: That's funny
to be saying that as a New
York City person, where we're
about as far as we can get,
almost.
DHARMA PADRON DALY: I know.
I know.
It's a hard place
to practice that.
But it's very important that we
practice that here, actually.
I guess every now
and then we get
a weed that grows out
of a sidewalk crack,
and we can pray to it.
DHARMA PADRON DALY: Well, yes.
I have a garden in my apartment.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: Better.
I have many plants.
And I love them.
And I water them every day.
I talk to them.
I clean the water through
prayers, for example.
I pray to the water.
And it's a very
powerful thing to do.
In terms of youth and
children, in these ways--
in the way of the South
and North American,
condor and eagle-- children
are very important.
And they are families, always.
The family is the
foundation of this path.
So you see babies
that are newborns.
You see grandpas,
grandmas, uncles,
cousins, mother,
father, everything,
every part of the family.
And what I've seen and what
I have experienced so far
is that everything that is
done is done for the children.
And we honor the
children so much.
They're so important.
It's not like usually--
like many times, also,
in this modern society,
when we gather,
we leave the
children on the side.
Oh yeah.
Let them go there.
We are here.
The they're there, in the
parties or things like that.
Not in these ways.
It's all about them, and
making them feel special,
and making them feel safe
and important as they are.
And what about you, Sergio?
What do you think?
SERGIO MAGANA: It's interesting.
In the tradition, the
rite to transition
from being children
to being an adult
would be, go to the mirror.
Because you can not only change
to animals and those things.
You can see the
ancestors in the mirror.
You can see your own ancestors,
the ancestors of the land.
And they would have
told you what was good
for you and for your community.
So it would be like a
training, seeing yourself,
that will make alive in you
the spirit of community--
not only what is good
for you, but what
is good for your bloodline
and what is good for the land.
What you see, though, in
Mexico City, with young people?
Is there an attraction to
this type of tradition now?
No.
We are so few-- I was in the
New Year of the Mexica tradition
in the 12th of March.
And we were like 300.
But now it's awakening.
For example I have
a radio show there.
And a lot of people come-- young
people and all those things.
But it's just starting.
We were talking the other
day about Teotihuacan,
and about what the
original function
and purpose of that place was.
-OK.
According to that, that's
why now it's shaking
a lot in the earthquakes.
Because the axis is moving.
So that it can align with
the planets and the stars
and all those things.
For example, all
the centers that
have moon temples
or moon pyramids,
they were to absorb
the effect of the moon.
Because for us, the
moon is like-- not
feminine or masculine.
Because for us, the moon
has a masculine name-- Black
Tezcatlipoca.
So it would be to absorb the
energy of the moon so that
the dream and the unconscious
wouldn't-- or the cave,
how it's named in the
ancient tradition--
wouldn't bother so
much the society
and the society's more ordered.
So when these temples
are aligned, and finish
the alignment, all these
temples of the moon
will be reactivated to
absorb the excess of moon
over the earth.
And so it will be a much
more ordered society.
So at that point,
we would kind of make
use of all these temples again.
We would get them going again.
Polish them up and get
the pyramids working.
Working again.
Like a cosmic machine.
Maybe use them as
initiation centers.
Probably they were used
like that in the old days.
Yeah.
Because a lot of people now
just go and see pyramids.
And they think that all the
energy of pyramids-- and they
go up the moon pyramid.
And then they feel tired
and all those things.
They are in the energy that is
absorbing all the bad energy.
You shouldn't climb there.
Only to release.
DANIEL PINCHBECK: OK.
Cool.
I just wanted to add.
You had mentioned something.
You know, these temples-- one of
the main temples is our temple,
our body.
We are a temple.
But you know, these ceremonies
help us clean out that temple,
and realign it.
As one of my elders
says, the medicine
is a precision instrument.
Our body-- we are the medicine.
But how we eat, how we live,
our temples are inactivated.
And through some of these
different practices,
these different
ceremonies, you begin
to learn the inner secret
knowledge that you can gain
when you begin to
communicate with that mirror,
with the ancestors.
They teach you how to access
these portals within ourselves.
And then we come together as a
group to these centers to help
activate those through
our ceremonies--
through the Moon Dance,
through the Sun Dance,
through the sweat lodge.
These are our portals that
would open so that we can bring
that earth-- the energy
from the moon, the energy
from the sun-- back onto
this planet through us
and through these temples
and these centers.
And so I was learning
to understand that.
You know, the word
prayer, in today's
society-- because
unfortunately, there's
a big confusion about it.
So for me, I like to kind
of use it-- for instance,
you mentioned we see a piece of
grass coming from the sidewalk.
We sit there and pray to it.
Well, not necessarily.
But connect with it.
Understand it.
That's your Mother
Earth reaching
through this concrete
barrier that we've put up
to make a connection with us.
It's even as simple
as our ancestors
used to walk barefooted
through woods and rocks.
And there was a
certain connection.
They would put moccasins on.
We have shoes that are hard--
all these different barriers
that we put on ourselves.
It's that concept of
how we can access that.
And we all have
everything inside of us.
It's just having the
understanding and the awareness
and the elder and that way to
connect to what we have inside.
And as I've seen, a lot of
these ceremonies teach you that.
And that's what ceremony is.
It's a practice so that you
can learn to access that.
One idea I heard around the
traditional Mayan calendar
was that when you learned
what your Day Sign was,
it represented kind of the
quality of intention or purpose
that your life would have.
And you were talking
about how people
today have lost their sense
of intention in a way.
Is that true for the traditions
that you're in, also?
SERGIO MAGANA: Yeah.
They are very similar.
You have a number,
a glyph, or a sign.
And that has a
tonal and a nahual.
It is said that there are 20
paths to the enlightenment.
For us, the word was flowering.
So through the number,
through the glyph--
I'm sorry.
I've just got to step
on that for a second.
I love that.
The word for enlightenment in
their language means flowering.
It's so beautiful.
Anyway, go ahead.
And so you have the
challenges that you have awake
and sleeping for
flowering, and advantages.
So it can help you a lot.
For example, I understood my
life completely-- the things
that I have lived-- when
I got my tonalamatl.
That is this story.
Awesome.
Cool.
Well, listen.
I want to thank all of
you for being with us
and for learning these
practices and sharing
them, and growing with them.
It's great to meet all of you.
Thank you for being here.
SALVADORE BOLIVAR
MADERA: Thank you.
DHARMA PADRON DALY:
Thank you for having us.
SERGIO MAGANA:
Thank you, Daniel.
[APPLAUSE]
[MUSIC PLAYING]